Update explainer with activatable & rewrite some parts (#47)
WICG/display-locking: explainer.md

This drives some amount of web authors to *virtualization* instead,
where they actually **refrain from putting things in the DOM**,
keeping content in memory in some non-DOM data structure,
with only the visible portion converted into DOM nodes and inserted into the document,
recycling them in and out as needed.
Popular examples include https://m.twitter.com/ and [react-window](https://github.com/bvaughn/react-window).
However, this will **make the web app suffer** because a lot of things like find-in-page,
accessibility, indexability, focus navigation, anchor links, etc.
**depends on having things in the DOM**.

We propose a new concept, **display locking**, to assist developers with **alleviating
jank caused by DOM updates** and having some control on **when to pay rendering costs**,
while also **allowing things that depend on the updates to get the up-to-date values** when urgent.

Using display locking, the developer will be able to lock an element and its subtree,
preventing visual updates.
Then, the developer will be able construct the locked subtree’s DOM however they desire,
and insert it into the DOM without any rendering cost or jank. After insertion, the element

> can be updated. These updates will be *co-operative* -- **interleaved with other

Reviewer: "updated" here needs some explanation. Maybe "marked for update".

Author: Changed it a bit, and also the commit part. PTAL

> can be updated. These updates will be *co-operative* -- **interleaved with other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be updated. These updates can be *co-operative* -- **interleaved with other
```

If they are small, they will complete immediately?

work such as running script or DOM updates outside of the locked subtree**. The
developer will then be able to commit the element's lock, causing the visual
updates of the modified subtree to appear.  In essence, display locking will
make it possible to **perform complicated DOM updates without causing the rest of

> the page to jank** and **only pay rendering costs on things that really needs it**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the page to jank** and **only pay rendering costs on things that really need it**.
```

runs in the same event loop as layout, and browser rendering semantics require
previous layout and visual update to be done before running subsequent script.

Creating more complex applications might also mean having a **larger number of things in a web page**,
making the rendering costs of having all of the content to actually be part of the DOM
prohibitively expensive.
This drives some amount of web authors to *virtualization* instead,
where they actually **refrain from putting things in the DOM**,
keeping content in memory in some non-DOM data structure,
with only the visible portion converted into DOM nodes and inserted into the document,
recycling them in and out as needed.
Popular examples include https://m.twitter.com/ and [react-window](https://github.com/bvaughn/react-window).

> However, this **causes problems for the web app** because a lot of things like find-in-page,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, this **causes problems for the web app** because a lot of user-agent features such as find-in-page,
```

accessibility, indexability, focus navigation, anchor links, etc.

> **depends on having the contents in the DOM**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**depend on having the contents in the DOM**.
```

- Measuring layout, with intent of sizing containers without actually displaying
  the contents.

In general, **large-scale updates** to application state in a web app can cause
updates which **induce large document lifecycle updates**, including style, layout,
compositing, and paint. In turn, these can cause jank on the page, due to
lifecycle updates being synchronous with script and user interactions.

> In a large-enough web app, even having small updates might be expensive even though

Reviewer 2: I find this sentence confusing. Are you trying to simply say that if the document is very large, even small diffs to it can be expensive?

- Measuring layout, with intent of sizing containers without actually displaying
  the contents.

In general, **large-scale updates** to application state in a web app can cause
updates which **induce large document lifecycle updates**, including style, layout,
compositing, and paint. In turn, these can cause jank on the page, due to
lifecycle updates being synchronous with script and user interactions.

> In a large enough web app, even having small updates like window resizing or a style tweak might be expensive,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a large enough web app, even small updates like window resizing or a style tweak might be expensive,
```

and also **request the user-agent to do the updates in a non-janky way**.

### Example code

In this example, we want to add a lot of items to a list in a non-janky way.

```html
<ul id="itemsList">
 <div>Item #1</div>
 <div>Item #2</div>
 <div>Item #3</div>
</ul>

<script>
// Remaining items in the list are in |remainingItems|.
// We want to add the remaining list items asynchronously.
remainingItems.forEach(item => {
  requestIdleCallback((deadline) => {
    let itemEl = createElementForItem(item);
    itemEl.displayLock.acquire({ timeout: Infinity, activatable: true });
    itemsList.appendChild(itemEl);
    // We can do expensive operations to the items without worrying of the rendering costs.
    // After we finished all the operations we can trigger a co-operative update & commit.
    // We might do this in a fancier way by not actually committing the element,
    // leaving it locked and detecting when to commit by using IntersectionObservers etc,
    // but that's out of the scope of this example :)
    doExpensiveOperationsToEl(itemEl).then(element.updateAndCommit);
  });
});

// If we need the updated style / layout values of the element, we can do it co-operatively.

> function getOffsetTopForLockedEl(element) {

Reviewer: I'm a little confused by this function. If the element is locked but none of its ancestors are, then I think this will cause layout to run on the whole doc. Locking the element on makes the layout values of things inside it cooperative, right?

Reviewer 2: Locking an element when it is already in the DOM tree only locks its subtree, not the element.

Reviewer 2: Looks good to me.

---
### Proposal

The display locking proposal is intended to **improve the script, layout, paint,
as well as parts of the compositing update phases**. In particular, it aims to add
javascript APIs to allow the developer to lock an element for display.

With the proposed APIs,
**web authors can control when not to pay the updating costs for a locked element**,
and also **request the user-agent to do the updates in a non-janky way**.

### Example code

In this example, we want to add a lot of items to a list in a non-janky way.

```html
<ul id="itemsList">
 <div>Item #1</div>
 <div>Item #2</div>
 <div>Item #3</div>
</ul>

<script>
// Remaining items in the list are in |remainingItems|.
// We want to add the remaining list items asynchronously.
remainingItems.forEach(item => {
  requestIdleCallback((deadline) => {
    let itemEl = createElementForItem(item);
    itemEl.displayLock.acquire({ timeout: Infinity, activatable: true });
    itemsList.appendChild(itemEl);

>     // We can do expensive operations to the items without worrying of the rendering costs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // We can do expensive operations to the items without worrying about the rendering costs.
```

Note that the acquire call takes options, consisting of the following key-value
pairs:
* (optional) `timeout`: `timeoutInMilliseconds`
  * This is an optional timeout value for the duration of the lock. When the
    lock is acquired, and commit is not called within `timeoutInMilliseconds`
    milliseconds, the lock will be automatically committed. This is a safety
    valve for protecting pages from inadvertently leaving an element locked
    indefinitely due to uncaught exceptions or other bugs in the code. For a
    more sophisticated use cases, the value of Infinity will effectively disable
    the timeout.
* (optional) `activatable`: `true|false`

>   * Signifies whether the user-agent can automatically unlock/commit the lock

Reviewer 2: remove "unlock"

    when the browser needs to *activate* the locked element or its descendants.
    See [element activation section](#element-activation) for more details.
  * Not setting this, or setting this to `false`,
    means this element and its descendants will be ignored in cases like
    find-in-page, anchor link navigation, focus navigation, etc.

#### DisplayLockContext.locked

This is a boolean value that will be `true`
if the `Element` associated with this `DisplayLockContext` is in the locked state,
and `false` if not.

#### The locked state

#### What happens

The element and its subtree's paint output (i.e. the output of the
layout and paint phase) will not change while the lock is acquired. In the
lock-before-append case, this means that the visual state is empty. What this
allows is for the user-agent to not have to finish processing the locked
element’s subtree when processing the layout and paint phase.

> In other words, when requested, the user-agent is free to process parts of the subtree,

Reviewer 2: This paragraph is I think hard to understand for non-experts. Is it really needed?

    lock is acquired, and commit is not called within `timeoutInMilliseconds`
    milliseconds, the lock will be automatically committed. This is a safety
    valve for protecting pages from inadvertently leaving an element locked
    indefinitely due to uncaught exceptions or other bugs in the code. For a
    more sophisticated use cases, the value of Infinity will effectively disable
    the timeout.
* (optional) `activatable`: `true|false`
  * Signifies whether the user-agent can automatically commit the lock
    when the browser needs to *activate* the locked element or its descendants.
    See [element activation section](#element-activation) for more details.
  * Not setting this, or setting this to `false`,
    means this element and its descendants will be ignored in cases like
    find-in-page, anchor link navigation, focus navigation, etc.

#### DisplayLockContext.locked

This is a boolean value that will be `true`
if the `Element` associated with this `DisplayLockContext` is in the locked state,
and `false` if not.

#### The locked state

#### What happens

When its lock is acquired, if the element already existed in the DOM,

> the visual content that was present at the time the lock was acquired is cleared,

Reviewer 2: This text about visibility: hidden is ok for now, but just noting that the discussion
we had on Monday about intrinsic sizing has bearing on it.

However, there is a problem in your description: the root element being locked in this
case is still painted and laid out. It's the subtree that is not painted.

Author: Hmm yeah, actually removed the `visibility:hidden` part now, we should update the details about intrinsic sizing later.

enabling the idle-until-urgent pattern.

#### DisplayLockContext.updateAndCommit()

This operation combines the effects of an `update()` and a `commit()` calls:
* It causes the element to be co-operatively updated.
* When the update is finished, the element is committed resulting in visual
  updates to appear on screen.

#### Element activation

When an element is locked,
there are some actions in the page that might require the element to get unlocked and be rendered to work properly.

If the browser needs to *activate* a locked element
or an element that has one or more locked ancestors,
in order to make the activated element be visible,

> it will commit all locked elements in the ancestor chain of the element to be activated,

Reviewer: I'm not sure if it's correct but maybe

Will commit all locked elements in the inclusive ancestor chain which have the `activatable` flag set to `true`

But I'm not sure if the bubbling jumps over or stops at activatable=false locked elements.

Reviewer 2: We haven't considered this case I think. I added an agenda item to discuss at the
weekly meeting.

Author: If any of its inclusive ancestor is locked & non-activatable, the element can't be activated, since even if we unlock everything else, it still won't be visible.

unless at least one of them is locked without the `activatable` flag set to `true`.

*Activating an element* is defined as one of the following actions:
 - `focus()` is called on the element
 - `scrollIntoView()` is called on the element
 - Tab order navigation lands on the element
 - Anchor link navigation navigates to the element
 - Find-in-page active match navigation goes to the element

For all the elements that we commit as part of element activation,
we will send a `beforeactivate` event to it just before committing.

#### beforeactivate event

| property  | value  |
|---|---|
| bubbles  | true  |
| composed | false |

> | target  | the previously-locked ancestor |

Reviewer 2: Nearest previously-locked ancestor?

Author: Since there can be multiple ancestor, not just nearest, I used "previously-locked ancestor" instead (and removed "the"). Maybe there's a better way to phrase this?

| activatedElement  | The element that needs activation  |

Consider this tree structure:
```html
<div id="first">

>  <div id="second"> <!-- locked -->

Reviewer: might be good to include 1 that has activatable=false.

Author: Yeah that makes sense. Added!

#### Lock-after-append. (locked subtree)

When the element's lock is acquired while the element is already a part of the
DOM, visual content of elements within the locked subtree
(not the locked element itself) is cleared
and the draw commands associated with that element's subtree are stashed

> and used while the lock is acquired. Note that in this mode, changes to the

Reviewer 2: The stashing referred to stale pixels. Can be removed.
